# Brain Tumor Detection using fine tuned ResNet50

## Overview

This project aims to detect brain tumors using transfer learning, showcasing the impact of data augmentation on model performance, particularly in cases with a small training dataset. The project consists of two main parts:
1. **Original Dataset Training:** Training the model on the original dataset containing 155 "yes" (brain tumor present) images and 98 "no" (brain tumor absent) images.
2. **Augmented Dataset Training:** Training the model on an augmented dataset generated by applying various data augmentation techniques to the original images.

The project demonstrates how data augmentation enhances the model's performance by exposing it to a wider range of variations within a limited dataset.

## Key Features

- Transfer learning using a pre-trained ResNet50 architecture
- Data augmentation to artificially expand the training dataset.
- Visualization of loss and accuracy curves for both parts of the project.
- Model evaluation with a focus on accuracy, given the class imbalance.

## Dependencies

- Python (>= 3.8)
- TensorFlow (>= 2.0) or Keras (>= 2.0)
- Matplotlib
- NumPy

## Usage

1. Clone this repository:

    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/ABKon2002/Brain-Tumor-Detection-using-fine-tuned-ResNet50-.git
    ```

2. Install the dataset locally or into your drive:

    - The dataset used in this project was downloaded from [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com). You are free to choose other brain tumor datasets as well.
    - Download the dataset --> [Brain MRI Images for Brain Tumor Detection
](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/navoneel/brain-mri-images-for-brain-tumor-detection?select=yes)

3. Install dependencies:

    ```bash
    pip install tensorflow
    pip install matplotlib
    pip install numpy
    ```

4. Part 1 - Train using the original dataset:
   
   - The code performs 25 epochs on the original dataset and the loss, accuracy curves have been plotted using matplotlib library.

6. Part 2 - Train using the augmented dataset:
   
   -  The code performs 25 epochs on the augmented dataset and the loss, accuracy curves have been plotted using matplotlib library.

8. Compare the loss and accuracy curves of both the parts:

## Results

The model achieved an accuracy of approximately 93.5% on the test dataset when trained using the original dataset and approximately 98.7% on the test dataset when trained using the augmented dataset.
This showcases the impact of data augmentation in improving model generalization even with a small training dataset.
